Word of Lady Constance’s actions spread quickly through Rosentry, and the people of the town are quick to take the leshys’ side, being genuinely aghast at the thought of someone kidnapping and imprisoning sapient creatures. The nobles promise to see Lady Constance suffer consequences for her actions, and several of the garden guests gleefully express how much they hated the noblewoman’s gardening guidelines and how much they look forward to breaking them now that she’s in disgrace. Should the PCs have substantially injured any of the guests, they’re treated as dangerous creatures that have come from Verduran forest in order to enact revenge— hardly a wrong assumption! In this case, wise PCs might flee town immediately lest they face the wrath of an angry mob.

With the kidnapped leshys returned to their home and Lady Constance foiled, the PCs can rest on their laurels for the time being, knowing that they’ve defended their friends and their forest. If you’re playing this adventure as part of an ongoing campaign, the fey and leshys of the area gather several rewards for the PCs in thanks for their services—you should tailor these rewards for each character so they’re given a permanent 4th-level magic item and two 3rd-level consumable items they can make use of.

In any event, the nobles of Rosentry are pacified for now, either out of friendship or out of fear, and peace is likely to follow for at least a little while. Humans are always quick to encroach on the wilds, however, and the leshys of Verduran must remain ever vigilant. As celebrated leshy heroes, the safety of the woods lies on the PCs’ shoulders!