---
ImportedOn: Sunday, 2 January 2022 11:52:34 AM
Aliases:
  - The Sword
Tags: Category/Region--Geographical
Geographical-Region: Mountains
Climate: Arid
Terrain: Deserts
parent:
  - Anauroch
up:
  - Anauroch
prev:
  - Anauroch Groups
next:
  - V - Netheril
down:
  - Addas Babar
  - Alagh's Pass
  - At'ars Looking Glass
  - Azirrhat
  - Bhaerlith
  - Colored Waters
  - El Ma'ra
  - El Rahalat
  - Elah'Zad
  - Hlaunga
  - The Hills of Scent
  - Lion's Eye Oasis
  - Lundeth
  - Ma'atar
  - The Oasis of Vipers
  - Olomaa
  - Orofin
  - The Quarter of Emptiness
  - Rasilith
  - The Saiyaddar
  - The Scimitar Spires
  - The Shoal of Thirst
  - The Sister of Rains
  - Tel Badir
  - Vuerthyl
  - The Wall of Fallen Djinn
  - The Well of the Chasm
  - The Well of Cloven Rock
  - Vliyl
  - The Black Road
  - Thulanthar
RWtopicId: Topic_755
---
# I - The Sword
## Overview
**Geographical Region**: Mountains, Hills, Plateau, Oasis
#Geographical-Region/Mountains #Geographical-Region/Hills #Geographical-Region/Plateau #Geographical-Region/Oasis

**Climate**: Arid
#Climate/Arid

## Description
**Terrain**: Deserts
#Terrain/Deserts

The southernmost band of [[1. Story World Almanac/Forgotten Realms/Toril/Faerun/1 - World Above/Anauroch]] is a desert of sand dunes, scorching hot by day, and icy cold at night. Its winters are as harsh as those of the other lands in the North-but in summer, it is a land of killing heat. The most populous part of [[1. Story World Almanac/Forgotten Realms/Toril/Faerun/1 - World Above/Anauroch]], it is the area most visited by outsiders (usually human merchants trying to find a shorter trade-route from the Moonsea cities to the Sword Coast lands, or adventurers seeking the lost riches of longburied kingdoms). To them, the hot sands resemble the Dust Desert of Raurin, and other, more southerly deserts of the Realms-and because all most folk elsewhere in the Realms know of [[1. Story World Almanac/Forgotten Realms/Toril/Faerun/1 - World Above/Anauroch]] is what such travelers tell of it, most in the Realms think [[1. Story World Almanac/Forgotten Realms/Toril/Faerun/1 - World Above/Anauroch]] is all one Great Sand Sea.

This sandy region is certainly the area of most interest to outsiders-partly for its strategic importance (to those seeking a traderoute, or a way past a certain realm, or an invasion route into a land), and partly because of [[IV - The Lost Kingdoms|The Lost Kingdoms]] that lie beneath it, whose buried ruins are widely believed to hold great riches and magic. (Something of the present-day truth of these fallen realms is explored in the chapter entitled [[IV - The Lost Kingdoms|The Lost Kingdoms]].)

One might expect, given the ready supply of slaves employed by the goblinkin races and some human peoples, that The Sand Sea would have been dug up into a succession of mounds of sand between huge quarry-pits, long ago, searching for this lost wealth. Almost every year, some daring adventurers do venture into the sands to seek their fortunes-but large-scale mining has never succeeded.

It fails underground because dwarves and others who try to enter by underground ways are never heard from again. Something (or a lot of somethings) slays them. The tunnels known to exist are ancient ways, and come up in the fiercely-defended elven hold of Evereska, the mountains of Tethyamar, and at various hidden places in the Stonelands.

It fails on or above the surface for two reasons: the harsh conditions (both the elements and monsters; the mountains that ring [[1. Story World Almanac/Forgotten Realms/Toril/Faerun/1 - World Above/Anauroch]] are home to many wyverns and dragons, who customarily hunt for prey over the sands), and [[The Bedine|the Bedine]].

[[The Bedine]] are fierce, nomadic human tribes. Although they fear sorcery, some among them are masters of desert magic, and their fearlessness, warlike nature, and expert knowledge of the desert make them deadly foes, in [[1. Story World Almanac/Forgotten Realms/Toril/Faerun/1 - World Above/Anauroch]]. It is their ways (raiding both each other and any outsiders who venture into the sands they roam) that have given the sandy southernmost region of [[1. Story World Almanac/Forgotten Realms/Toril/Faerun/1 - World Above/Anauroch]] its colloquial name: The Sword. The Sword stretches from the midst of The Lonely Moor in the west to the northern end of the Border Forest in the east, and from west to south to east (ignoring mountain ranges and the broken Desertsedge borderlands) borders on the Sword Coast backlands (once the dwarven realm of Delzoun, in the north, and the human realm of [[V - Netheril|Netheril]], south of that), the elven fortress-realm of Evereska, and areas that once made up the dwarven realm of Oghrann: the human settlements of the River Reaching Highlands, the Zhentarimcontrolled Sunset Mountains area, and the nomad-roamed Tun Plain.

Then it touches on the kingdom of Cormyr (through the Goblin Marches and the Stonelands, which Cormyr has always claimed but never really ruled), the independent Dalelands (including Lost Vale, the ruins of now-vanished Tarkhaldale), the long-vanished dwarven realm of Tethyamar (now peaks roamed by goblins, orcs, and bugbears), and the Border Forest. The Goblin Marches is an ill-defined area of crags, drumlins, and bogs, cloaked with many thorny thickets-and home to goblins, orcs, and kobolds.

It lies below the heights of the Stonelands, which is a broken region of pine forests, ridges, tors, and tangled ravines that surrounds the Stormhorns mountain range, and runs east of it almost as far as Shadow Gap.

Most merchants reach the dwellers in the desert by means of a narrow, long-dry river valley that divides the broken heights of the Stonelands from Alauthwaerd, the Watcher, southernmost peak of the Desertsmouth Mountains. This valley, Raudilauth (which means Desertdoor in an ancient tongue; the language and its speakers are forgotten, but the meaning has survived) links the overland trade-road through Shadow Gap with the lands of the Dtarig (a race described in the Other Peoples of Anauroch chapter).

Let us see the Sword briefly through Bedine eyes. [[The Bedine]] know that the sand sea where they live is vast indeed-and although a hard land, it is alive. Many plants, insects, birds, and animals live on or burrow under the endless dunes-and there is a dark, dangerous world lurking below: the catacombs of the Buried Ones. The meager pastures of [[1. Story World Almanac/Forgotten Realms/Toril/Faerun/1 - World Above/Anauroch]] support few men and camels: in a year of riding from pasture to pasture, a Bedine tribe might meet as many as two other tribes. In this harsh land, such meetings are seldom friendly.

Most Bedine know that the desert gives way to a wind-scoured land of barren rock on all sides. In some direction-probably to the south-this must give way to areas settled by men for occasionally non-Bedine paleskins or bonehide men come into the desert. These intruders (most Bedine use the term outlanders) seldom live long.

### The Desertsedge
In actuality, the edges of the Sword rise into rocky foothills, dotted with scrub plants and marked by caves, breakneck ravines carved out by small, rushing streams (that plunge down into the desert, where they soon vanish, drunk down by the thirsty sands). This uneasy border area is lashed by winds and frequent storms (where hot and cold air clash), and roamed by many fearsome monsters. It is known as the Desertsedge (or Deserts Edge, depending on the cartographer), and aside from temperature, varies little from the northern- and easternmost explored mountains of the Sword Coast lands, to the infamous Stonelands, to The Glittering Snows.

## The Landscape
Outlanders see the Sword as an endless sea of crescent-shaped dunes that rise and fall like waves in a sandstorm (hence Anaurochs most popular nickname, The Great Sand Sea). It is indeed a hot, sandy region, but is in fact much more varied than that. Sand dunes do cover most of its surface. All four types of desert dunes can be found in the Sword: waves (transverse), troughs (longitudinal), crescents (barchan), and star dunes.

Transverse dunes are wavelike ridges, formed by moderate winds blowing always in the same direction. These winds move only light sand; the heavier grains swirl aside in eddies, forming ridges across the direction of the blowing wind. Longitudinal dunes form when stronger one-way winds are present. They move heavier sand, cutting long troughs (parallel to the wind direction) through the transverse ridges. Barchan dunes form where sand is relatively scarce, lying thinly atop rock. A wind blowing in one direction (in the Sword, usually from west to east) blows the sand into ridges, as with a transverse dune, but is able to move along the ends of the ridge more readily than the humped center. Thus, the ends advance and curve inward, forming a crescent. Novice outlanders should note that the ends of a crescent alsways point opposite the direction of the prevailing wind.

Star dunes, named for their shape, have ridges radiating from a central height and are relatively stationary (whereas the rest migrate steadily in the direction of the winds). Star dunes form when winds blow from all quarters.

Many dunes in the Sword are high indeed, but there are few draa (sand mountains, of over a hundred feet in height) among them; rocky pinnacles and ridges are the usual heights in this land. Tall rock outcroppings are rare; far more common are small ridges or piles of weathered rock. Their crevices and shaded ledges give a home to snakes, lizards, nocturnal raptors, and desert bats. A few of these rocky outcroppings overlie water, reached by crevices and fissures in the rocks. Larger creatures may lair here, deep beneath the hot sands, venturing forth in the chill night. Thorny salt-bushes and other scrub growth on a ridge tell of certain water somewhere beneath. Even if there is no water to be found in a rockpile, it can provide shade to a creature able to slither through cracks, or dig out a resting-place by shifting rocks.

Distant booming sounds are not uncommon in the Sword. Sometimes these are caused by faraway thunder: the Stonelands, along the southern edge of the unnatural dry area in which much of [[1. Story World Almanac/Forgotten Realms/Toril/Faerun/1 - World Above/Anauroch]] lies (see The Secret of [[1. Story World Almanac/Forgotten Realms/Toril/Faerun/1 - World Above/Anauroch]] chapter), see many violent storms, fogs, and unsettled conditions. More often, the sounds are made by sand heavier than a castle keep, falling down the slip-face of a high dune. One slip may set off others, in a chorus that causes the ground to tremble with a repeating beat.

Some superstitious Bedine attribute the rumblings to the knelling alarms of longburied fortresses, the ghost-haunted castles of the Buried Lands, which is the term by which they know [[IV - The Lost Kingdoms|the Lost Kingdoms]].

Not all of the Sword is sand. Besides the obvious exceptions of oases and mountain ranges, areas of the desert such as Atars Looking Glass are plains (flat sheets) of pebbles or bare rock sheets. These are covered with glistening salt, evaporated from the infrequent rainfalls by the terrific heat of the sun beating on the stone. These salt pans gleam a dazzling white in the sun. Some salt pans, near the southern edges of the Sword, are treacherously thin crusts covering saltwater bogs deep enough to drown in.

In the rare cases where one finds a stream in the desert (almost always when it has sprung up on a mountain and run down into the sands, to soon vanish), it forms a gulch. If the water is sufficient, the gulch will be roofed with the droopy, twiggy branches of ghaf trees, and lined with tasseled sedges of qassis bushes. These crowd together around the water, offering animals down in the draw shaded shelter (and concealment from the eyes of all watchers not actually in the gulch). The tinkling of the stream can be clearly heard from afar when the wind is low, and at other times the wind carries the smell of the water to camels and other desert animals. Doves and quail live around such a watercourse.

Rain is too infrequent to keep streams and rivers flowing continuously in the Sword; where there is no natural spring causing it, the water dries up between rains, leaving dry wadis (dusty, open watercourses). These may become raging, muddy torrents when rain does fall-for there is nothing in this parched land to catch or slow the flowing water. When a spring fails, streams may vanish altogether. The small ponds or lakes fed by such springs then dry up, forming mamlahahs, or dead waters: These appear as small, flatbottomed valleys, their clay-rich soil cracked into a plain of irregular alabaster pentagons as hard as ceramics baked by humans. A muddy pond surrounded by acacia trees is left, at the last of the deep water; when the water fails entirely, these also die away. The heated air of any sand desert causes mirages (false images of water, oases, or other phantom things, on the horizon) and heat shimmer.

Heat shimmer is a visual distortion that dwellers in the Sword are quite used to, but by day it still causes even veterans of desert life to fire missile weapons (at medium or long range) at - 2 to hit. This handicap increases to - 4 when the target is a mirror image (as caused by the wizardly spell), or a being engaged in blinking or wearing a cloak of displacement.

### The Desert by Day
By day, the desert is a merciless oven, little suited to human existence. Wise desert dwellers hide in what shade they can find, or move only slowly and carefully, doing only light work (digging back into shelter if disturbed is commonly the only strenuous task most desert life undertakes). The desert winds provide a steady drone, dropping at sunset.

On a clear night, sunset in the Sword looks something like this: Atar (as Bedine call the sun) sinks steadily towards the western horizon, a great disk of blinding yellow light that turns the sea of dunes ahead into a labyrinth of silhouettes and dazzling yellow reflections. The lowering sun darkens to scarlet, and as it sets behind the dunes, the western sky turns a spectacular amber and ruby. As the light fades, the troughs between the dunes turn velvety shades of ebony and indigo, while the crests of the dunes are tipped with a rosy ethereal glow. More level areas turn purple at dusk. Everything darkens: slowly at first, and then with increasing speed. Deep purple gives way to the blackness of night (unless or until the moon rises, and the pale greenish-white moonglow lights the tops of the dunes). The temperature drops with the light, lingering in the sand for longer than it does in the air.

### The Desert by Night
In the Sword, the desert is chilly at night, the sky usually clear. The winds die to gentle breezes, or fail altogether. The stars form a brilliant glittering display overhead.

The constellations are many and varied-or at least, the countless stars visible in the clear desert sky are known by many names throughout the Realms, varying from race to race, realm to realm, and even from Bedine tribe to Bedine tribe. Here we will mention only those most useful for navigating. These most prominent stars are visible all over the North, and are used by travelers in many, many places outside the borders of [[1. Story World Almanac/Forgotten Realms/Toril/Faerun/1 - World Above/Anauroch]]. The west is marked by two fuzzy clusters of blue-white stars, which appear as two sideby- side crescents or arcs in the sky, points downward. To most Bedine, these are The Two Jambiyas (and this is mirrored in the Moonsea cities, whose folk generally call them The Double Daggers). To some Bedine, these are the Eyes of [[Elah (Selune)|Elah]] (closed, only the lashes visible); in like manner, some barbarian tribes of the Sword Coast North call these the Eyes of the Watching Woman, and men of Hills Edge speak of where Selune looks back. Whatever one calls, them, true west can be found exactly halfway between the two arcs-heading straight between the eyes.

The North is marked by an awesome circle of large, bright stars with utter darkness between them, which is known to most folk today as Mystras Star Circle (her floating Castle of Night, in childrens fairytales, is said to float in the center of the darkness). Due north is marked by the brightest Brow Star, called Alagairtha by [[The Bedine|the Bedine]], after a proud Bedine sorceress who is said to have challenged the gods long, long ago, and been imprisoned in the heavens as a punishment: to preserve her breathtaking beauty, but keep her forever fromen).

South in the desert sky is marked by a zigzag line of stars that crawls along the horizon, from west to east, beginning with an upswept head or bright starry cluster, and ending with a curving tail of stars. To [[The Bedine|the Bedine]], this is the Serpent of the Sands, Urwath, The Swallower. The desert nomads believe that this creature is wild and amoral, older than the gods, and that it swallows mountains, trees, and grasses to create the desert, leaving only sand in its wake. Its presence in the southern sky, most Bedine believe, means that the desert will continually expand southward, as it eats its way across the Outlands. Folk elsewhere in the Realms do not see this line of stars so clearly; not being on their horizon most of the time, it is enmeshed in a tangle of small constellations, and is not thought of as a unit. In Tunland, Cormyr, Iriaebor, and Westgate, however, it is recognized as a star configuration marking the direction south: and is known respectively as Faeraula, the Sword of the South, the Southfires and the Lightning Bolt.

## Weather in the Sword
Very hot and windy by day. Very cold and relatively calm by night. Rarely sees rain or snow even when the lands around are lashed by torrential rains or locked in the grip of the howling blizzards. The are is just too dry. Most weather consists of differences in wind direction and force. From still dead air to windstorms that reshape the desert landscape.

Violent winds always catch up and carry along desert sand. The main visible characteristics of sandstorms is that the sky is obliterated. Vision is typically reduced to only a few feet.

Rainfall is scare and variable. One spot gets it, but a mile away no rain may fall. The rare wet storms of the Sword tend to be both short and violent. Lightning strikes are common, thunder rolls and the rainfall is hard and fast without ever wetting the landscape land thirsty Bedine below.

More often, the rare rainstorms lash the ground, transforming wadis into raging torrents that can drown camels and even larger creatures in moments. The sparse vegetation of the Sword cannot hold water; rain runs over the land, seeking the lowest elevations, until it sinks into a salt pan or is all evaporated away by the heat of the sun.

All over the desert, as the water falls on the sand, flowers open. Insects rush to them and swarm in the air to mate, lay eggs, and feed, hurrying to take advantage of the fleeting moisture. So too do the reptiles, birds, and mammals of the desert. Perennial plants blossom and set seed, and some plants spring up from seed to dot the desert with brief life; when the water is all gone, they will have grown, flowered, and produced seeds again, to wither and die in the dry heat that follows. Cacti swell up in these wet spells, storing water.

The desert is briefly a place of plenty, and [[The Bedine|the Bedine]] rush about, gathering all they can (many desert herbs and fruits can only be found at such times). Rains have even been known to halt battles, as everyone turns to gathering precious foodstuffs. With most of the desert snakes, lizards, and other animals on the move, they are plentiful, easily seen, and are relatively easy prey.

## Desert Wildlife
Although conditions in the Sword are as harsh as those known in Raurin and other, larger hot sand deserts, the Swords unnatural origins enable it to exist much closer to plentiful water, and very different climates, than other deserts. This allows more intrusions into the Sword than may occur in other deserts, both from so-called intelligent creatures (such as humans and orcs), and from lesser life, such as insects. Swarms of moths are not unknown in [[1. Story World Almanac/Forgotten Realms/Toril/Faerun/1 - World Above/Anauroch]], coming out of the Stonelands and the backlands of the Sword Coast. Insect swarms can be met with in spring and fall in the hot region, and at all times except chill winter along the edges of the desert. Insect Swarms These are fully detailed in Volume 4 of the Monstrous Compendium. DMs lacking this DRAGONLANCE® appendix can use the following simplification: Characters with AC 0 or less in contact with a swarm are 80% likely, each round, to be bitten for 1 hp of damage (plus 1% per point of Armor Class; i.e., a being with an AC of 6 has an 86% chance, an unarmored person \[AC 10] a 90% chance of being bitten). Vision is reduced to `dice: 2d8` feet, and all beings caught in the swarm suffer -2 on attack and damage rolls due to pain, loss of clear vision, and the interference of the countless flying insects. Beings in a swarm are unable to speak (insects will clog their mouths), so most spellcasting is impossible. (For variety, use the effects of the insect plague spell.)

**Insect swarms** eat everything edible (i.e., the meager desert plants, and any available carrion) in their path; this can cause camels to starve, if forced to travel through the same area the swarm did. Smoke or fire scatters swarms, or turns them away. Other attacks totalling 60 points of damage crush enough insects to cause the swarm to move on. (Most insects are edible, and five handfuls can sustain a starving human, but eating them is not pleasant. Their acidity may cause sudden stabbing pains when the eater exerts himself; in combat, AC is reduced by 1, and attack rolls are made at -1.) Rolling in sand or dousing with water temporarily removes insects from a being. (If PCs manage to exterminate an entire swarm, award 2,000 experience points.) Insects are the most numerous desert creatures, but are not the most visible, except when swarming. Most Bedine will tell a questioner that they see the incessantly-tittering, nocturnal desert bats most often of all desert wildlife.

**Desert Bats:** These bats wing over the dark desert (Fl 14, MC B) in search of insects of all sorts and sizes. They are AC 7, have `dice: 1d4` hp each, and can bite for 1 hp of damage (THAC0 20), but most avoid contact with large creatures if at all possible. Some drink blood, and will bite sleeping camels or humans with needle-sharp fangs, fluttering rapidly away an instant later when their target awakens. Desert bats lair in rock crevices by day, and tend to be dark in hue, leathery and bony (a desperate man might need seven or more to make a meal). Very few (8%) carry diseases. Daytime Desert Life Only a few wild desert creatures are active during the day, such as camels, grasshoppers, beetles, and spiders, which have long legs to hold them away from the hot sand.

Lizards, snakes, antelopes (particularly gazelles), asses (especially onagers), and lions can be found in plenty, if one knows where and when to look, in the Sword. The most common large animals are camels. Camels Camels (also described in [[The Bedine|the Bedine]] Society chapter) are native to the Sword. Wild camel droves have become very rare, however: Bedine hunters have seen to that, scouring the desert in search of animals to capture and tame.

A wild drove typically consists of one or two males and three to five females, sleeping in the open at night and grazing by day on grasses, brushwood, and shrubs. The males fight and bite savagely during mating times (right after the rains). Camels have a gestation period of 370 to 440 days, and give birth to single young. Infant camels are suckled for 3 or 4 months, and arent fully grown until they are 16 or 17. Camels only live to be around 25 years old. To stay in peak condition (full carrying or pulling capacity), a camel working in the hot desert needs to drink some water at least every third day. In cold winter weather, camels can go without drinking for several months. Contrary to the beliefs of most outlanders, camels do not have water-sac organs, although desperate nomads kill camels and drink both their pea-green, salty rumen-sac fluid, and their blood.

Pack dromedaries can carry 600 pounds, and a Bactrian camel up to 1000, for around 30 miles a day. Normal walking speed is only 3 miles per hour. A fast walk (both legs on one side stepping forward, then the other side) is 6 miles per hour, but camels can only keep this up for a few hours at a time. Racing camels can go almost twice as fast as pack animals, but to keep one moving at its fastest pace (the long trot) the rider must create a sore on the camels neck, and prick it continuously.

The Strange And The Unknown Desert wildlife is little known to outlanders, and new forms are being discovered constantly. There are even rumors that a magical gate has been opened somewhere in the northern Sword, linking Faerun with the world of Krynn: adventurers have reported meeting with hatori, horax, skrits, and even tylors there. Explorers are warned: just about anything may be met with in the desert! Of interest to outlanders (only due to their odd appearance) are curious fuzzy crawling brains (as the adventurer Thayalin of Baldurs Gate aptly described them) seen after rainfalls. These are giant velvet earthmites: vivid, hand-sized, wrinkled, furry, red, crawling things. They are harmless, unintelligent, and inedible, and emerge during the rains to eat termites, mate, and then burrow back down under the sands until the next rains.

Even in dead central areas of the Sword, dried windborne vegetation supports a few insects, which in turn are fed upon by arachnids and reptiles. In some areas, the ground is white not with salt, but with the large shells of countless desert snails. The snails themselves slip out of their shells to spend the dry summer in a torpor, deep down in cracks in the ground, or among rocks. Their abandoned shells are sealed up with an exuded membrane, to trap as much moisture inside as possible, but a shell only holds enough moisture to sustain a thirsty human body for a day if that body (by means of magic, perhaps) is four inches tall, or less.

Wizards with pocketfuls of snail-shells and a spellbook with a reduce spell in it have walked alive out of the Sword, by moving (in normal size) at night, shrinking, drinking the moisture in a shell, and sheltering in it by day, studying to replace the used reduce spell and sleeping).

## Desert Plants
Plants are far fewer in desert areas than elsewhere in the Realms, but they are present in a great variety of types and sizes. Most are thick and fleshy, and have small leaf and surface areas, so as to hold as much moisture as possible. Most also have features to discourage predators, such as thorns, unpleasant odors, or poisonous or laxative juices or secretions.

Desert plants tend to have short life cycles; like the animals, they must take advantage of brief periods of wet after rainfall. Some plants can grow, flower, and produce seeds in as little as a ride (10 days).

### Typical Plant Varieties
The more numerous desert plant types are briefly described below for DM use in describing desert landscapes. Those that are especially edible (or dangerous to eat) are noted. The profusion of plant life found in oases is covered later in this chapter, in its own section, as are desert crops. Allium is an onion-like plant that grows up from a buried crown in spears, like asparagus. It is eaten by many desert-dwellers, both human and animal, and is always a good source of water. It is hardy; a dead allium withers but allium rarely rots or carries any mold, fungus, or disease. Boojum Trees may grow to the height of a mans shoulder, but are more often only three feet or less tall. They resemble giant parsnips (or whitish carrots), growing upside-down, on the ground, because they have conical whitish trunks, that taper to their topmost point.

Bare for much of the time, boojum trees sprout leaves in times of rain. in a few weeks, these leaves drop off; the stems they leave behind are thorns that can scratch humans for 1- 2 hp of damage per contact, and which dissuade grazing desert animals from munching on boojum wood. The boojum trees of the Sword are not edible, but a desperate human could chew the woody flesh to get some water from plant juices. Bunch Grasses grow in bunches or tufts, from bulbs buried in the sand. The tops (broadbladed grass spears, a favorite food of grazing desert animals) wither and die each year, only to come up again from the bulb. The bulbs are edible but unappetizing; a man would have to eat about thirty of them every 24 hours to gain enough water for survival. Buried Tubers are a valuable regular foodsource for Bedine and other desert animals intelligent enough (and physically suited) to dig for them. These can grow as large as two mens heads, and hold much water (life-savers in times of drought).

On the surface, these plants are found by their grassy stems (which flower during rains), and tend to grow in a line, following the shape of the buried root beneath. The roots tend to be brown or golden-brown in hue, knobbly, and grow in a long, roughly straight cylindrical shape. They have hairlike roots growing out of them, all over: tough, stringy things that may be as long as seven men are tall, and are best gnawed or cut off, if one wants to take the tuber out of the sand and carry it away. Cacti are the most impressive desert plants. They all tend to be bulbous and prickly, but range in shape from prickly pear groundbud sorts to giant saguaro multi-armed upright types.

A staple to some Bedine tribes, cacti can be mashed to yield drinking syrup which will keep for months, or can be fermented into a drink. The cactus flesh can be eaten, the seeds made into a sort of butter, the stems of giant cacti used as tent-poles, the thorns used as sewing-needles, and the dried husks of longdead cacti can be burned as fuel.

Few cacti taste nice, and only a few can be cut open to yield plentiful free water; most must be mashed, or the flesh chewed, to extract moisture. The thorns dissuade most desert life from disturbing cacti, unless they have swords to cut it apart. No known cacti in the Sword can throw their needles at targets that arent touching them, but many have thorns that detach at the slightest brush of a solid body. Cacti thorn-damage ranges from 1 point for a single contact with a small cactus up to `dice: 2d12` points for a full-body fall or charge into a giant saguaro. Most contacts (e.g. being hit by a prickly cactus club wielded by a human opponent, or stumbling into an upright cactus) deal `dice: 2d4` points of damage.

Cereus grows from a buried bulb. The variety found in the Sword looks dead by day, its small cluster of leafy stems drooping and shrivelled. At night, the leaves open to reveal floral blooms that gather moisture, and are sticky enough to trap insects that light upon them, which the plant drains for food. Both the flowers and the bulbs are edible, but the gluey floral secretions make most humans who eat them violently ill, costing moisture and food value, rather than bestowing it. Chenopods are grasses that grow in arcshaped tufts. They are a vivid reddish-purple, and their juices are poisonous tall mammals who eat of this type of plant must save vs. poison or immediately suffer `dice: 2d4` hp damage, followed by a `dice: 2d12`-turn period of nausea and mental confusion). Beings affected by chenopod poison make attack and damage rolls at -2, and suffer an Armor Class penalty of 3 points. At the onset of contact with the poison, the victim must make two successful Intelligence checks. If either or both fail, the victim is feebleminded until the poison wears off.

Chenopods have a biting, nose-stinging odor. They grow evenly spaced in the sand, because their efficient roots drink all the water for a certain distance around them, and no other plants can grow in that space. To eyes not versed in desert ways, this always looks as though the chenopods were deliberately planted by human (or other intelligent) hands.

These hardy plants tend to be found in a ring around the outermost watered fringes of an oasis, spring, or other water source. Creosote bushes found in the Sword are small, gnarled, many-branched things that are russet, rust, or purplish-black in hue; they are tarry, oozing black, sticky liquid whenever their jointed branches are broken. They are burned by Bedine over catchbasins to extract a sticky tar used for sealing water-containers. Lichens are the scabrous, repulsive-looking grey-green growths on rocks. They are edible (but unappealing, and of very low food value), and grow on the sides of rocks closest to large bodies of water. In the westernmost third of the Sword, lichens grow on the western sides of rocks, in response to damp winds blowing in from the Marsh of Chelimber.

Mesquite trees provide Bedine with most of their firewood. These unimpressive trees may yield a surprising amount of wood, once uprooted and sun-dried: their roots may go down a hundred feet or more to tap deep water. In doing so, the trees stabilize sand dunes they are growing on, holding them in place against wind migration. Ocotillo are root-based plants with leafless, dead-looking stems (except just after rainfall, when they sprout many tiny leaflets, which soon fall off). As a result, they escape many desert foragers, being dismissed as dead. The variety found in the Sword is not edible except as roughage for very hungry, antelopes and camels. Puncture-Vines are thankfully-rare creeper plants that grow in rocky areas where some water is present. They flower in rainfalls, but otherwise look like mottled green ropes tangled upon the ground, marked every foot or so by a ring or collar of bristling thorns, which are sharp, sturdy, and almost impossible to avoid. Contact with any collar of thorns does `dice: 1d4` points of damage; a being falling on several collars, or who is bound with a length of thorny vine, suffers damage per collar contacted, for every contact with, or movement to get out of, the vine. Saltbush (or Saltbrush) are a variety of withered-looking shrubs that are the most numerous desert plants. They stud dunes all over the Sword, and form the main diet of camels on the move.

Windmills, named for their overall shape, are flowering plants that send out several stems along the ground, radiating out like spokes of a wheel, to gather water, and to send up other tufts. They anchor the sandy surfaces of dunes, and their tough stems can be used to tie things down (until they dry out and fall apart, which takes `dice: 3d10` days; add `dice: 1d8` days whenever a stem is wetted by rain, blood, or submersion in water).

### Desert "Crops"
In addition to plants harvested for personal survival, Bedine (and others who venture into the Sword) can glean goods from the desert that can be sold for profit: desert crops. The best-known of these are frankincense, myrrh, and salt (though few village folk in Amn or even the Dragonreach, for instance, know that these things come from the desert). Bedine selling such crops generally trade with Dtarig, but may sell these things to outlanders (if the outlanders have things [[The Bedine|the Bedine]] want, and seem too powerful for [[The Bedine|the Bedine]] to overpower and slay).

The most important desert crops of the Sword are listed here, in alphabetical order. They are the reasons why many merchants venture north from Arabel and Tilverton, and east from Hills Edge, to meet with the Bedineand they are spoils that more than one adventuring band has brought back from the hot sands.

First, there is the favorite drink of [[The Bedine|the Bedine]]: coffee. The plants whose beans yield the bitter brew (which increases in popularity across the North, as the years pass) grow wild in certain oases and mountain valleys in the central Sword, and some Bedine tribes have begun to cultivate it. Certain trees, particularly in mountainous areas of the eastern and northeastern Sword (and westward, in hills along the southern edge of [[II - The Plain of Standing Stones|the Plain of Standing Stones]], where many small, nameless streams rush down out of the rocks, to sink into the sands and be lost) yield another desert crop: an aromatic, amberhued resin known as dragons blood. Its trees mingle with others, those types that produce the more famous frankincense and myrrh, and all three resins are used in similar ways. It is difficult to put prices on resin crops, because raw resin is often bartered away by [[The Bedine|the Bedine]], not soldand commands far less than buyers must eventually pay for it in far-off cities of the Realms. Roughly, a Bedine sells fist-sized lump of the finest raw frankincense for 1 gold piece. An identical lump of dragons blood is worth 5 sp, and an identical lump of myrrh 3 gp.

Frankincense is derived from trees of several related species. All have very short trunks; they split near the ground into a fan of branches. The ideal growing conditions for these trees are a steady, hot sun, pale limestone soil, and heavy dew from a monsoon (wet, onshore coastal) wind, or from abundant mists. (On the watered northeastern edge of the Sword, these occur each morning, as the sun rapidly heats cold, damp ground.) Frankincense is harvested by chipping away bark from tree branches with a spatulalike chisel, scraping clean a patch the size of a mans hand. Milk-white sap tears well up in the wound immediately. The harvester moves on to other trees. When he returns, three weeks later, the ooze will have hardened into a translucent golden resin: frankincense. The first scrapings are worthless; the second cutting, weeks later, yields low-quality frankincense (typically used by Bedine in their own bodyrub perfumes and aromatic tentsmokes burned in braziers); only the third gives pure, sweet-scented frankincense.

Across the Realms, frankincense is used for rituals and health purposes. Specifically, it sees use in the scenting of incense, which is burned in various religious rituals (for example, to appease a god, to consecrate or cleanse a temple, to mask the odor of cremations, and so on). Its odor also makes it a valued ingredient in cosmetics, from simple Bedine pastes to the most intricate and costly spiced concoctions of Calimshan and Mulhorand. Frankincense is also thought by many to be useful in curing gout, mental confusion, vision problems, and skin disorders. The almost white variety, known as shihri, is chewed by Bedine and some folk of Unther, Mulhorand, Raurin, Thay, Tharsult and Calimshan because its good for the teeth and gums, and helps clear the brain. (Just how effective frankincense really is in such endeavors varies from person to person, and in game terms, is left up to the DM.) The desert hills and mountains yield another sort of riches: gold, which in the Sword tends to be found in pure, soft, large nuggets or lump-like inclusions in larger rocks. Many Bedine tribes make their own coins, using the sand as a mold, but more often, nuggets are melted into egg-shaped trade-balls or fashioned into heavier bars, called fists, that fit into a mans palm, with a row of fingerholes, rather like a pair of brass knuckles. The value of either unit of gold varies with the market (supply), and the particular pieces size and purity, but a ball tends to be worth around 15 gp, and a fist around 25. The mountainous areas of the desert, particularly near permanent sources of water, give shelter to many birds. The droppings of these fowl (unlike, say, those splashed on a neglected stone statue in some ruin of the Sword Coast North) are not washed away by the infrequent desert storms, and over the years may accumulate, on the rocks where birds nest or perch often, into thick concretions. This guano is a rich fertilizer, prized in large cities of the Realms.

It is also burned as fuel by those who can stand the heavy, cloying smell. A sack of guano as big as a mans head might fetch a Bedine the equivalent of 1 sp. Other desert rocks yield deposits of gypsum (used in the making of plaster and alabaster). It is broken off into chunks, although the dust is as valuable and useful, and also sold in headsized sacks (the Dtarig continually supply [[The Bedine|the Bedine]] with empty sacks), which command about the same price as guano. Certain bushes, which grow here and there in the mountain foothills and knolls of the Sword, yield indigo. This dark blue dye is derived by stirring the crushed leaves of the indigo bush into water, which yields a mixture as thick as porridge. This mixture is used as a clothing dye; sun-baked clay jars of it are traded by [[The Bedine|the Bedine]], who put it to their own use by putting purchased rolls of cotton cloth into the dye jars, soaking them for days, and then rolling the cloth out on a dirt surface and beating it for hours with wooden mallets, to work the dye into the cloth. In winter, some Bedine tribesmen rub indigo mixed with sesame seeds (for their oil, when crushed in the hands) on their bare chests and legs. They believe it keeps them warm. Myrrh is a resin harvested from a single thorny, squat species of tree that grows deep in the Sword. It is three times as expensive as frankincense, but only one-fifth as popular. When heated, this resin breaks down easily into an aromatic oil of many uses. Oil of myrrh is employed in religious purifying anointings; burned as a fumigant; added in tiny amounts to sauces in cooking; and used in embalming and as a medicine for pregnant Bedine women. The resin can also be formed into beads that are strung into necklaces, releasing the fragrance when warmed by the skin. Bedine cooking-fires also yield potash, sold in the rough and as the valuable Faerunian rarities glass and soap. The conversion of potash (with other ingredients, such as sand) into glass and soap are processes held secret by certain Bedine tribes, although many in the Realms know them. An outlander who reveals he knows how to make glass, or soap, to such a Bedine tribe will be slain to protect the secret. The nomads simply wont believe the arts of making soap and glass are widely-known. Bedine signal-glasses (small, curved handmirrors) are made by such processes. Some signal-mirrors are curved to fit into a small earthen pot with a lid, for concealment and to prevent accidental flashes when riding in the sun.

Bedine also mine salt in the Sword. In some placesespecially in the eastern Sword, where the sands cover the ancient, hardened remnants of vanished seassalt can be cut from the ground in slabs. When working these deposits, Bedine tend to cut slabs as long as a man and that weigh as much as two men, so that one can be strapped to either side of a pack camel. Salt is valuable in the North both for curing and preserving, and a camel-slab can fetch as much as 30 gp. Humans need extra salt to survive in the hot desert, so Bedine consume a lot of the salt they gather. Small veins of salt can be found in many places in the Sword, in crevices between rocks. Salt can also be derived by evaporating saline water on hot, bare patches of rock, although few Bedine tribes can safely reach the salt-pans that overlie water, to cut them open. No plants will grow where salt is too plentiful, even when water is abundant; to the experienced desert-dwellers eye, a spot where there is water enough for plants, but which has none, is a telltale sign of salt. Sesame seeds can be gathered only by those Bedine near the Desertsedge, but they are used both as a food (roasted and eaten by the handful) and as a source of sesame oil, which has many uses (chiefly in cooking). It is sold by some Bedine tribes in clay jugs that taper at both ends, as long as a mans leg and as large around in the middle as a mans head, for about 1 sp a jug. Sesame oil is derived by means of camelpowered mills. A camel is driven around and around in a circle, hauling a wooden beam counterweighted with stones. The hub of the beam turns in a mortar hollowed from a desert acacia, crushing sesame seeds to make the oil. Desert plants also yield tanbark and turmeric, used by Bedine women as a makeup and sunscreen, and by many folk of Faerun as a dye and a spice-but supplies of these are intermittent, and they do not command high prices.

## Oases
All creatures of the desert are more numerous where water is more plentiful. The oasis, or shallah (a word older than [[The Bedine|the Bedine]] tongue, and known in the Moonsea area and Amn, suggesting it came with mankind from the ancient South), is a name given to places where, in this most dry of deserts, there is always water. Oases are islands of life in the desert, readily recognizable by the green plants that grow in profusion about them. They are the areas that [[The Bedine|the Bedine]] (and in particular, their camels) depend upon, to survive. Almost all oases in the Sword are claimed by a Bedine tribe, or shared (seldom at the same time) by several tribes. Oases vary in size and characteristics, and some have become poisoned, so that their water gives aid only to those with magical means of purifying it, or immunity to the taint. There is such a thing as a false oasis, where the water fails from time to time.

A typical oasis is centered around a pond, usually a spring-fed depression. Streams dont flow far in a sandy desert; the water sinks into the sand and is lost again, and the sun evaporates rainwater quickly from depressions. A lasting pool requires an additional source of water. Around this watersource wild shrubs and trees spring up; often apricot trees and thornflower bushes, overseen by soaring palm trees. Oases undisturbed by man support more shrubs, oleander and tamarisk trees than date palms, fruit trees, and vegetables. But in the Sword, Bedine hands have worked on almost every oasis, carefully selecting date palms and fruit trees, and tending them so as to cover the maximum possible area. Trees are propped up where possible, to maximize shade and to raise the nests of birds out of the reach of some predators (fresh eggs are a delicacy on Bedine tables). For the same reason, thorny vines are trained around the trunks of trees low down, but kept carefully cut back to avoid choking the trees.

Whatever artificial means are used to make the oasis larger, or more fertile (all garbage and human refuse, for instance, are buried in crescent-shaped beds located to feed existing trees and to encourage the spread of seedlings), a distance is eventually reached at which the heat and lack of water stop tree growth. The oasis dwindles around its edges to tufts of salty grass and spindly chenopods, before giving way to the endless sea of sand again. Jackals, hares, gazelles, and even ostriches may be found at oases in the desert-and all desert animals come to oases to drink, when they must. Bedine and others who know how can gain food in oases where there is apparently none to be had (and in many places along the less-dry sands of the Desertsedge), by digging up a staple diet of edible bulbs and roots. They also eat burrowing worms, insects, and eggs, both avian and reptilian (the empty eggshells are then used as water containers), found in oases.

New oases do occur naturally from time to time, as springs find their way to the surface in a new spot. These occurrences are rare, and the full life of an oasis is slow to develop around the newfound water, although some plants will quickly sprout in the hitherto barren sand.

### Created Oases
[[The Zhentarim]] have hit upon an ingenious practice: growing an oasis around a decanter of endless water). At least five such bases are known to exist in the desert: [[Bhaerlith]], Haunga, Maatar, [[Olomaa]], and [[Vuerthyl]]. The chosen sites are often bolsons (natural basins at the foot of mountains or ridges, and shielded by them from the worst of the desert winds). Wadis may already lead down into these sites from the mountains above; it is always easier to establish plants when waterhungry plants are already present. On the other hand, [[The Zhentarim|the Zhentarim]] want to put oases where Bedine tribes wont expect to find them (and so wont come looking), and in strategic locations to create a trade route with abundant water, available often, so that camels are never worked to death. This leads some created oases to be founded in unprotected desert, or even on raised, windswept plateaus that overlook the surrounding sands.

[[The Zhentarim]] create artificial oases by digging out ponds where bedrock is near the surface, and sheltering rock outcrops are nearby, activating a decanter of endless water and dropping it in the excavation, and then bringing in seeds, plants, and the like by means of teleportation spells. This takes a lot of time and gold pieces, so the Zhents do it only when an oasis is critical to the success of a caravan route. [[The Bedine]] quickly find such new desert features, and [[The Zhentarim|the Zhentarim]] have to defend them if they want to gain any benefit from all their work.

So such artificial oases are few-and all of them sport magical and physical traps, or even fortifications, and guardians. These are sometimes minor Zhentarim wizards, with a bodyguard of warriors ([[The Bedine|the Bedine]] fear of sorcery makes even weak wizards more effective than four times their number of Zhentilar warriors). The guardians may also be summoned or placed creatures, such as guardian daemons (detailed in Volume 2 of the Monstrous Compendium) or watchghosts (detailed in The Ruins of Undermountain boxed set).

---
## Governed Content
- [[Addas Babar]]
- [[Alagh's Pass]]
- [[At'ars Looking Glass]]
- [[Azirrhat]]
- [[Bhaerlith]]
- [[Colored Waters]]
- [[El Ma'ra]]
- [[El Rahalat]]
- [[Elah'Zad]]
- [[Hlaunga]]
- [[Lion's Eye Oasis]]
- [[Lundeth]]
- [[Ma'atar]]
- [[Olomaa]]
- [[Orofin]]
- [[Rasilith]]
- [[Tel Badir]]
- [[The Black Road]]
- [[The Hills of Scent]]
- [[The Oasis of Vipers]]
- [[The Quarter of Emptiness]]
- [[The Saiyaddar]]
- [[The Scimitar Spires]]
- [[The Shoal of Thirst]]
- [[The Sister of Rains]]
- [[The Wall of Fallen Djinn]]
- [[The Well of Cloven Rock]]
- [[The Well of the Chasm]]
- [[Thulanthar]]
- [[Vliyl]]
- [[Vuerthyl]]


---
## Tags
#Import/Forgotten-Realms-Atlas

